tutorial settlement / internal (#388)
digital-asset/docs.daml.com: docs/2.7.0/docs/daml-finance/tutorials/settlement/internal.rst

.. Copyright (c) 2023 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Internal Settlement
###################

This tutorial builds upon the concepts introduced in the
:doc:`Settlement <../getting-started/settlement>` getting-started tutorial. Compared to our previous

> :doc:`Enhanced Transfers <transfer>` tutorial, which demonstrated the "direct" transfer a holding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:doc:`Enhanced Transfers <transfer>` tutorial, which demonstrated the "direct" transfer of a holding
```

> between sender to receiver (at a single custodian), it delves further into the settlement mechanism

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from sender to receiver (at a single custodian), it delves further into the settlement mechanism
```

> with a batch and related instructions. This intricate process enables the adjustment of record books

Reviewer: Not sure I would call it intricate :)

across multiple entities and instrument holdings simultaneously.

In this tutorial, we will limit the complexity by focusing on a single custodian and the transfer of

> a singular instrument. The next tutorial will explore the broader scenario involving multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a single instrument. The next tutorial will explore the broader scenario involving multiple
```

custodians. Eager learners are encouraged to extend this tutorial and the following one by
incorporating more than one instrument as an exercise.

Understanding Internal Settlement with Examples
***********************************************

> To start, let us briefly revist the concept of a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start, let us briefly revisit the concept of a
```

:ref:`Batch <type-daml-finance-interface-settlement-batch-batch-97497>`, which consists of one or
more :ref:`Instructions <type-daml-finance-interface-settlement-instruction-instruction-30569>`.
Each instruction signifies a
:ref:`RoutedStep <type-daml-finance-interface-settlement-types-routedstep-10086>`, delineating the

> quantity of an instrument to be transferred from a sender to a receiver at a specific custodian. For

Reviewer: fyi, you could also link to the `Settlement` page in the concepts section

Reviewer 2: added a link

an instruction to be prepared for settlement (or execution), the sender-side must furnish an
:ref:`Allocation <type-daml-finance-interface-settlement-types-allocation-46483>`, and the
receiver-side must provide an
:ref:`Approval <type-daml-finance-interface-settlement-types-approval-84286>`.

This tutorial will walk you through three example scripts for settling instructions at a single
custodian: ``runWrappedTransferSettlement``, ``runCreditDebitSettlement``, and
``runPassThroughSettlement``.

The allocation processes in these scripts involve methods to commit a pre-existing holding
(``Pledge``), a newly created holding (``CreditReceiver``), and a holding received concurrently
(``PassThroughFrom``).

The approval methods entail taking delivery of a holding to an account (``TakeDelivery``),
immediately nullifying the holding (``DebitSender``), and passing the holding through (as
allocation) to another instruction (``PassThroughTo``).

> Each script kicks off with ``runSetupInternalSettlement`` which initiates parties, an instrument

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each script kicks off with ``runSetupInternalSettlement`` which initiates parties, a cash instrument
```

issued by the Central Bank, accounts for Alice, Bob, and Charlie at a Bank, and a settlement
factory:

.. literalinclude:: ../../finance-settlement/daml/Scripts/Internal.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- WRAPPED_TRANSFER_SETUP_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- WRAPPED_TRANSFER_SETUP_END

> The settlement factory is employed by a party, known as the requestor, to create a batch and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The settlement factory is employed by a party, known as the `requestor`, to create a batch and
```

  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- WRAPPED_TRANSFER_SETTLE_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- WRAPPED_TRANSFER_SETTLE_END

Note that this occurs without involving the Bank, and either Alice or Bob could also take the role
as the requestor. As a result of running this script, Alice's holding is transferred to Bob.

Credit and Debit
================

An alternative approach to transfer the holding from Alice to Bob includes the Bank as an
intermediary.

.. literalinclude:: ../../finance-settlement/daml/Scripts/Internal.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- CREDIT_DEBIT_INSTRUCT_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- CREDIT_DEBIT_INSTRUCT_END

Similar to the previous scenario, Alice allocates by pledging a holding, and Bob approves by taking
delivery to his account. However, in this case, the Bank plays an intermediary role by allocating
and approving, debiting the sender and crediting the receiver, respectively:

.. literalinclude:: ../../finance-settlement/daml/Scripts/Internal.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- CREDIT_DEBIT_SETTLE_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- CREDIT_DEBIT_SETTLE_END

We could have made the Bank approve and allocate its instructions by taking delivery to an account

> it owns and pledging a holding where it acts as the custodian. However, this would necessitate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it owns and pledging a holding where it acts as the custodian. However, this would require the creation of
```

"dummy" accounts and holdings, which can be avoided using the ``DebitSender`` and ``CreditReceiver``

> methods. These methods are exclusively accessible to the custodian.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
methods. These methods can only be used when the receiver (resp. the sender) corresponds to the custodian.
```

Pass Through
============

> The final script of this tutorial demonstrates how holdings received in the same settlement process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final script of this tutorial demonstrates how holdings received as part of the same settlement process
```

can be allocated to a subsequent instruction. We again use two instructions, ``instruction1`` and
``instruction2``, but now with Charlie as the intermediary:

.. literalinclude:: ../../finance-settlement/daml/Scripts/Internal.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- PASS_THROUGH_INSTRUCT_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- PASS_THROUGH_INSTRUCT_END

> As in previous examples, Alice allocates by pledging a holding, and Bob approves by taking delivery

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like in the previous examples, Alice allocates by pledging a holding, and Bob approves by taking delivery
```

to his account. The intermediary, Charlie, allocates using
``PassThroughTo (charlieAccount, instruction2)`` and approves with
``PassThroughFrom (charlieAccount, instruction1)``, essentially enabling the holding Charlie
receives from Alice to pass-through to Bob:

.. literalinclude:: ../../finance-settlement/daml/Scripts/Internal.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- PASS_THROUGH_SETTLE_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- PASS_THROUGH_SETTLE_END

The significant advantage of the pass-through method is that Charlie doesn't need any holdings
upfront as he's at a net zero position for incoming and outgoing holdings in this settlement process.

> Note that the Bank could have utilized the pass-through approach to achieve the same result, but it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the Bank could have utilized the pass-through approach to achieve the same result in the previous script, but it
```

would still require a "dummy" account.

> Run the Script

Reviewer: I would put this section before you explain the scripts, or remove it altogether

Reviewer 2: I removed it.

**************

The code for this tutorial can be executed via the ``runWrappedTransferSettlement``,
``runCreditDebitSettlement``, and ``runPassThroughSettlement`` functions in the ``Internal.daml``
module.

Summary
*******

By the end of this tutorial, you should have a good grasp on how to apply various allocation and

> approval methods at a single custodian. The key points are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
approval methods to instructions. The key points are:
```

* A custodian can utilize the ``DebitSender`` and ``CreditReceiver`` methods to bypass the need for
  "dummy" accounts and holdings when approving and allocating instructions, respectively.
* A holding settled via an intermediary at the same custodian can be passed through, thus
  eliminating the requirement for the intermediary to possess the holding upfront.

> In the forthcoming tutorial, we will delve into more complex settlement transactions involving

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the forthcoming tutorial, we will delve into more complex settlement transactions involving a transfer across
```
